WHEN most theater -, concert - or museumgoers come in contact with a creative work, they expect the play, composition or painting to be a finished, polished product.
They may pause to reflect on the arduous and perhaps mysterious process that led from the first spark of an idea, through many creative twists and turns, to a completed work with which the artist presumably was more or less satisfied.
Yet rarely does that average arts consumer get the chance to see a rough cut of a movie, read a draft of a novel or attend a not-quite-ready-for-production version of a play.
However, on a rather disheveled block of West 52d Street, audiences will have just that sort of opportunity at the Ensemble Studio Theater, where its annual New Voices series opens tonight and continues through Jan. 24.
The theater, whose year-round mission is to develop new plays, will present two free staged readings of each of six works in progress by established playwrights, as well as by some of the country's most promising young dramatists.
The plays range from Laurence Klavan's '' Magic Act, '' a comic mystery that will be performed today and tomorrow at 8 P.M., to a Chekhov-like tale about an Appalachian family written by the veteran playwright Romulus Linney.
The subjects and styles of the plays vary, but what they do have in common, according to the artistic director, Curt Dempster, is that they are the cream of an abundant theatrical crop of roughly 2,000 scripts that the theater has received in the last year.
'' New Voices is a testing ground for new scripts, '' said Mr. Dempster, a 52-year-old writer, director and actor who has developed and produced more than 250 new plays since he founded the Ensemble Studio Theater nearly 17 years ago.
'' It's a low-risk situation for playwrights, yet it gives their plays a baptism of fire. ''
'' There has to be some kind of testing, because it costs so much to produce a play, '' said Mr. Linney, whose play '' Precious Memories '' will be presented on Jan. 22 and 24.
'' It's like opening night, but with a staged reading, you can commit yourself to revising the play or you can reconsider and put it back in the trunk. ''
'' When I hear people's reactions, I can find out what's missing, '' said Katharine Long, whose first full-length play, '' Sedalia Run '' - a tale of love and madness in Depression-era Missouri - will be performed on Jan. 20 and 21.
'' Just by watching the audience, you can tell if they're with you or not, '' she added.
New Voices is also valuable to playwrights because their works are directed and performed mostly by members of the theater, creating a collegial atmosphere in which to work, according to Ms. Long, who has been involved with the Ensemble Studio Theater since graduating from college a decade ago.
'' Because you have good actors and directors reading your play, '' Mr. Linney said, '' the deep waters into which the scripts are thrown are a good, honest test. ''
The series, however, offers more than just feedback for writers and a sort of State of the Union of contemporary American playwriting.
Audiences are excited to see plays in the informal setting of the theater's 100-seat main stage at a point of development that they are not able to see elsewhere, said Mr. Dempster.
Many Produced Elsewhere Many plays that were first presented in New Voices - such as Michael Brady's ''To Gillian on Her 37th Birthday' 'and Derek Cloud's' 'Stick Wife' '- have gone on to be produced on the theater's main stage and at theaters throughout the country.
' 'The aim of New Voices is to get plays into production,' 'Mr. Dempster said.
One of last year's plays, Jose Rivera's' 'Promise,' 'for example, will be given a full production at the theater later this year, he said.
The theater, which is at 549 West 52d Street, not only produces plays, but also runs a training institute for playwrights, directors and actors, and serves as a studio and artistic support group for its more than 300 members.
This nexus of seemingly nonstop thespian activity occupies three floors of an old furniture warehouse that the theater leases from the city, near 11th Avenue in the gritty Clinton district.
By day, rehearsals and classes fill the two stages, while at night, invitation-only workshop productions and readings, as well as full-fledged plays, are presented.
Last season, a total of 229 different plays were produced or read during various series, such as the theater's annual marathon of one-act plays, its Octoberfest of dozens of works-in-progress and its summer conference in the Catskills in Tannersville, N.Y. The six plays for New Voices were chosen in October, and rehearsals began last month.
But before the selections were made, a small team of inveterate play-readers, led by Jennifer Lombard, the theater's literary manager, spent many bleary-eyed months poring over tens of thousands of pages of manuscripts.
Quest for Strong Voices' 'We're always on the lookout for strong, individual voices,' 'Ms. Lombard said.
Three of this year's plays are by members of the theater, she said, but submissions also came from writers and agents in 43 states and Canada.
And one of this year's works - Laura Maria Censabella's' 'Abandoned in Queens,' 'a drama about the effect a housewife's disappearance has on her husband and son - arrived unsolicited in the mail.
Other works to be presented this month are Wendy MacLeod's' 'Apocalyptic Butterflies,' 'a comedy about the travails of a young couple in the woods of Maine, and Edward Allan Baker's' '27 Benedict Street,' 'about a released prisoner who finds his half-brother a bit too involved with his wife and child.
The series may serve as a launching pad for new productions, but it also provides creative catharsis for the writers.
' 'I think it was Trollope who never finished a book without starting a new one,' 'said Mr. Linney.
' 'But once a play gets to a certain level, you know you can go on to something else.
And after this reading, I'll be able to start on other works.' '
SCHEDULE OF THE PLAYS New Voices' 88, a series of six new plays, will begin tonight at the Ensemble Studio Theater, 549 West 52d Street.
Admission is free, but reservations are required and donations are requested.
Information: 247-3405.
A schedule follows.